so
we will just talk about this non-ideal
iv characteristics of the
mosfet and i just want to quickly show
what are the non-ideal catalysts that we
are going to discuss
so there is a couple of topics and this
non-ideal
iv characteristics effects comes into
picture only when we discuss about a
channel length that is
less than one micrometer but when you
consider a channel length there is more
than one micrometer maybe
the channel modulation uh effect would
be there but not all other
effects would be uh taken into account
here so
whenever the technology that we are
choosing is less than one micrometer
technology
then all of these secondary effects will
come into picture
okay the very first second order effect
that we are going to discuss
would be like velocity saturation effect
and the next one would be the mobility
degradation
and the third one which we have already
discussed is nothing but the channel and
modulation but still i will just
revisit this particular topic and then
the body effect obviously you know what
is body effect
there is some relation with respect to
the body effect with the threshold
voltage of the device okay
we'll talk about that and there is also
something known as short channel
effect and this structural effect is
again related to the threshold voltage
okay and there is something known as
dibl or drain induced barrier lowering
which is again related to the threshold
rotate so
if you just see the body effect the
short channel effect
the drain induced barrier lowering or in
shorter form it is known as the ibl
effect
so all of these three effects are in
general related to the threshold voltage
apart from this we also have something
known sub threshold conduction even
though
it is related to threshold voltage uh
the phenomena is
more related to the current flow okay so
that's why i am not included under the
threshold voltage topic
but it's a kind of separate subunit of
this non-ideal
second-order effects clear and
again when we reduce the thickness of
the oxide when we go for lower
technologies what happens is that
there happens to be some sort of leakage
okay so we have two type of leakages
one is through the oxide so which is
which we call it as a
gate oxide leakage and the other one is
the junction leakage when there is a pn
junction
so again there is some sort of current
flow through those pn junction because
of a very high electric field around
them okay
and finally we will talk about this
mobility and the threshold voltage
variation with respect to the
temperature
so these impacts can be observed not
only
for the shorter channel but can be also
observed for the longer channel as well
okay so because generally the mobility
as well as the threshold voltage are
susceptible to
the variation in the temperature okay so
we will be discussing some of the topic
much more in depth but
a few topics will not go much in depth
but rather something like a topic that
we discussed for
diffusion capacitance so we'll be just
having a glimpse of it and will not go
much in depth
clear now today i'll just try to cover
this velocity saturation effect okay
so before we discuss about this velocity
saturation effect i just want to derive
the current equation of a longer channel
okay and then we'll just get into the
velocity structure effect
and see how does this velocity
saturation effect
impact the current that flow between the
source and the drain
then i have a channel length that is
less than one micrometer here
so i'm just going to talk about two
things
one i'm just going to call
long channel for
a length that is greater than one
micrometer okay so
long channel transistor if at all if i'm
saying then i'm trying to specify that
the length of the channel is more than
one micrometer
okay if at all if i'm trying to say that
i'm working on the shorter channel
it generally assumes that the length of
the channel is less than one micrometer
okay so these are the two notations i
will be using so whenever i'm referring
to longer channel you can
always assume that the length of the
channel is much larger
okay and whenever i say it's a short
channel the length of the channel is
less than one micrometer is the
assumption that you have to hold
okay now whenever we go for shorter
channel
we have all this uh 10 effects that i
have listed here okay
so let me derive each one of them
first in order to talk about the first
effect which is nothing but the velocity
saturation effect i have to derive the
current equation for the long channel
okay and then i will just get into the
short channel current equation okay how
does this velocity saturation impact
our current equation that we have been
using for a longer channel
here now before i proceed i'll first
brief about
the theory behind this velocity
saturation effect clear
let me give some sort of analogy say for
example you have a bike which runs at a
particular speed a maximum speed okay
say for example like 100 kilometers per
uh that is the maximum speed
but you you try to accelerate more than
that it is something like you have an
accelerator
right so you try to even though you you
try to push
uh your oscillator beyond the limit what
happens is that
the bike will not go beyond a particular
speed the velocity of that particular
bike gets saturated okay
200 kilometers per hour okay the same
similarly the electrons that exist
between the source and the drain across
the channel will also
have some sort of saturation okay now
we know from the classical theory i
guess you are familiar with the drift
velocity right
so vd here talks about what is known as
a drift
velocity so what is the relation that i
can specify
between the drift velocity and the
electric field how do i relate both
these quantities
you have a source in the drain okay
and there is some sort of potential
difference between this
source and the drain so which means that
i have some positive voltage across the
radius
okay and this vds in short creates an
electric field between the source and
the drain
okay and let me call that electric field
as el okay which is
basically laterally there exists a
horizontal field
okay so there exists a horizontal field
and due to which i'm calling that
electric field as an el
okay so now
as i increase the value of this vds the
field also increases
and due to which what happens is that
the the charge carriers that i have
which is basically an electron
will try to run to the speed of the
field okay
so this drift velocity can be related to
the lateral electric field by the
mobility of
the carriers that i have so in short
based on this classical theory
if at all if i try to plot the electric
field
versus the drift velocity you would find
that
the carriers will try to attain a
specific
drift velocity based on the electric
field that it has
here and the the slope of this
particular graph would be
equal to mu or mu n that i have written
here
okay higher the voltage that i give the
higher the electric field that exists
and due to which the free carriers
will be drift through the source and the
drain by
a much higher drift velocity clear
so that is the relation that we have for
a longer channel okay
okay so let me write this e l
how do i write this e l in terms of
potential difference
the electric field in terms of vds how
do i write that
minus dou v by dou x yeah so it would be
okay so this is what he's trying to say
and again when we try to look the x
basically stands from here to here the
electric field exists from
a length of 0 all the way to a length of
l okay so due to which it becomes
something like vds
by l the electric field in short could
be written as
v ds by l okay now once we start
reducing the length of the channel okay
whenever i am trying to deal with a
shorter channel the length of this
channel will become small okay and due
to which the electric field
will be very high even for a small value
of vds
am i right even for a small value of vds
what happens is that
because the length of the channel is
very short the electric field shoots up
to a very
large value okay and as i said
there is something known as a critical
electric field okay
so for even for small value of vds
the electric field across the source in
the drain reaches what is known as
the critical electric field at which the
drift velocity is no more
given by this expression which is given
as mu
n times that of e l but rather
it would be equal to saturated velocity
okay
the drift velocity will become saturated
okay and it never follows this relation
which is defined as mu n times that of
e l yeah and that is what we call it as
a velocity saturation effect now
since because my drift velocity is
shifted from
being this expression to this expression
okay we will find something different
okay so
i'll talk about this impact when we
discuss about short channel
effect probably in the next class but
today's class let us assume that we are
dealing with a longer term and i just
want to show you
the derivation of this longer channel
current equation okay and later we'll
utilize this derivation
of this long channel into the short
channel discussion
when we talk about the velocity
saturation effect here pictorially i can
represent this
impact by reaching
a particular velocity which we called as
a v sat okay
at which the el becomes
ec that is the critical electric field
once i cross this critical electric
field
the velocity of our carrier becomes
saturated okay
the drift velocity becomes equal okay
and this is what we call it as a
brush saturation effect okay but today
let me try to con conclude the class
not with the discussion of velocity
saturation effect but for a long channel
how do we get the current equation
for the current discussion let us assume
that
i am working in the deep triode region
or deep linear region okay so in this
deep linear region
i am going to assume that the value of
vds is
closer to the value of 0 okay not
exactly equal to 0 but let us assume
that it is so
small that it can be approximated to the
value of zero okay
so with that condition let us try to
evaluate the current that flows between
the source and the drain
and we know that the current i can be
returned as the moment of charge
with respect to the time right so it can
be written as
dq by dt so charge across the channel
divided by the time okay now
let us evaluate each of these quantities
individually okay
we know this charge q can be written as
c times v
okay now when i look across the
capacitance that i have
it is the total gate capacitance that i
have okay so it can be the c
quantity can be returned as something
like coax which has a unit of farad per
meter square
so in order to get the total gate
capacitance i need to multiply
the length and the width of the channel
so due to which i will have this as my
total
capacitance gate capacitance but what is
the effective voltage that gets dropped
across this
channel is it vgs
or is it something like vgc
in order to create the channel i have to
have a gate potential
which is more than the value of vt so
which means that we have to
offset this particular threshold voltage
okay so due to which the effective
voltage that
appears across this channel would then
be returned as vgc
okay gate to channel i'm writing okay
minus
the offset voltage which is dvt okay so
hope that you are clear with this the
effective gate voltage that i have
across this channel is not just vgc but
it has been offsetted by the threshold
voltage and due to which i
write it as vgc minus vth okay now to
create the channel i need
a minimum of gate to a channel voltage
which is equal to vt so that i am
offsetting it here
okay so now let us talk about
this vgc okay now this vgc can be
written as
vg minus vc right
now what is our channel voltage
this channel voltage is nothing but i
can write it as the average between the
source
and the drain voltage okay so
i'm just going to write this channel
voltage as an average voltage between
the source and the drain okay
so vg minus vs plus
v d times zero of two
now to this i'm just going to add and
subtract
the source potential voltages okay so
when i try to do
what i can do is that you could see that
there is a kind of quantities that you
can
combine okay so you have this quantity
and also have this quantity okay
so both of these things you can combine
and you
can create what is known as vgs okay and
then you have you have been left over
with the other two quantities which is
vds half and this vs
half okay so both of these quantities
you can write it as vds by
two clear so this vgc
can be written as v g s minus v d s
by two here so that concludes the
channel charge now let us try to write
this time
which is nothing but the transit time of
your carriers between the source and the
drain
now this transit time can be derived
from what we called as a
drift velocity okay so since
the carriers are moving across a length
of l with a speed of
v d i could write the transit time as
l by v d right now
again we know that this drift velocity
since because we are dealing with the
longer channel i can use this classical
formula of mobility times that of the
lateral electric field and again we know
that this lateral electric field
can be returned as vds dirt by the
length
okay so now that when i try to plug in
all of these quantities
this drift velocity can be returned as
something like
mu n times that of radius and this l
will go to the top and what we have is
something like l square divided by mu
mu n times that of vds okay so now i'm
just going to plug in all of these
quantities
for the expression of ideas okay so our
total ideas would then be returned as
something like mu n
c o x w by l
okay because there is one l term that
sits here so we were cancelling one of
the else due to which we will end up
having just w by l here
and then our v g s minus
v d s by 2 minus
v d h into
there is one vds that is coming here and
that i will write it here okay
so this is the total expression that we
have and this
is the current equation in the linear
region
now in order to evaluate the current
equation in the saturation region
we know that when the value of vds is
equal to vdsat and that voltage
for a longer channel can be returned as
vgs minus vt
then this whole of this ids can be
returned
as saturation current to be equal to
mu n c o x by 2 into
this v g s minus v d the whole square
okay so this is the current equation for
the saturation region and this is the
current equation
for the linear region okay so with this
discussion i'll just stop here
and these are the current equations for
the longer channel okay so in the next
class i will discuss about how does this
current equation
gets modified particularly the
saturation current equation
modifies due to this velocity saturation
effect okay
so we'll talk about this how does this
current equation gets modified
when i have this saturation effect in
the next class okay
so i'll just stop here